good evening and welcome to open Journal
our weeknight look for reality behind
the headlines CIA director William Colby
testified today before the House
Intelligence Committee he talked about
the CIA and the use of agents employed
by the press his testimony today was the
culmination of a story broken some time
ago and Robert Krulwich reports on that
from Washington this spring in New York
City a reporter named Stuart Lawrie
spoke to a convention of journalists and
told them about a scandal that is two
and a half years old that is all but
forgotten but he is still going on and
here is Laurie describing what he found
out in the winter 1973 in
november/december Oswald Johnson had a
story in the Washington star reporting
on the basis of high CIA officials or
some such blind quotation the fact that
three dozen American News men were
either on the payroll or working in some
kind of contract relationship with the
CIA he went on to report in that story
that six of those people worked for
general circulation news gathering
organizations in this country sort of a
vague term but I take that to mean the
large newspapers the wire services the
news magazines the networks or
organizations like that the story said
that these six people would be
terminated but that the agency plan to
keep the other thirty or so people
either on the payroll or in their
contract relationship and presumably
these people work for lesser-known
organizations or perhaps trade papers or
were freelancers who sold their
information not only to publications but
also to the agency the story said that
these people work in the nature of
information gatherers for the agency and
that that was all they did and the
agency needed them because news men
could go places that CIA people
themselves couldn't and with propriety
gather information that CIA people
couldn't a rather startling story that
ran at the top
of the front page of the Washington star
in fact above the flags spread across
the with a banner headline across the
whole paper with the exception of one
rather weak follow-up in the New York
Times the several days or maybe even a
couple of weeks later by morty Arnold I
there was absolutely no follow-up in the
American press and I wonder why that was
I I have some ideas on that but I'm not
quite sure
at any rate one editor was interested in
that story and that was Kent Pierce of
the Columbia Journalism Review who
called me at the end of March and asked
me if I would be willing to take a look
at that story and I said sure it was not
an easy story to get he despite the fact
that there had been rumors for years and
years and years about the involvement of
American newsmen overseas he with the
CIA when you started checking out some
of those rumors you found that nobody
had any recollection they were all
unwilling to talk they all had ideas but
they they would not pinpoint people
there was only one person who was
pinpointed and that was my old boss on
the New York Herald Tribune the foreign
editor a man by the name of Seymour
Frieden and as a matter of fact the
Johnson story resulted from the fact
that one of the offshoots of Watergate
was the blowing of Friedman's cover by
Jack Anderson and les Witten as a former
employee of the Central Intelligence
Agency well to make a long story short
although I set out to find the names of
36 American newsmen who were working for
the the CIA I could not find one name I
did find however that it one point for a
period of five years in the late 1950s
and early 60s the CIA owned a piece of
the Rome Daily American a rather large
piece I and helped the the majority
stockholder to buy that paper in the
1950s when it was running into trouble
because they felt that an American voice
and the Middle East had to remain under
very plate control I found that the CIA
during the Cold War period used American
newsmen not only as information
gatherers
but as misinformation disseminators I
found that the CIA had its agents
admittedly in foreign news agencies
agencies such as Reuters and it saw
nothing wrong with that despite the fact
that that misinformation that they might
give to writers in that way and other
agencies would find its way back into
the American press
I found that CIA agents were getting
access to unpublished photographs
memoranda unpublished stories I add
outfits like the Christian Science
Monitor and in some of the lesser-known
publications of the mcgraw-hill
Publishing Company and I found that
despite the fact that William Colby who
incidentally was the source of the
Johnston's story and was going around
Washington trying to leak that story
after the the freedom disclosure I found
it despite his promise to to terminate
the the six people for the general
circulation news gathering organizations
immediately that in the fall of last
year one of those guys if he was a guy I
was still on the the CIA payroll I and
that nothing was being said about it
that was reporter Stewart Lawrie who now
works for the Chicago sun-times talking
in New York a few months ago we have
talked with Stu Laurie since then and
with a few others and we can now fill
you in on some interesting details about
this story since the 1950s the Central
Intelligence Agency has used journalists
and their editors and their publishers
in two different ways first to gather
information for the agency and second to
disseminate any communist propaganda now
the reporters have not always been aware
that the CIA was looking at their
material some work for some very
prestigious paper's like the Christian
Science Monitor in Boston would file
their stories write memos to the home
office their stories would be edited and
printed what they didn't realize was
that the CIA
I was paying visits to their editors
Joseph Harrison the overseas editor of
the Christian Science Monitor from 1950
to 1961 reported to Stu Laurie that he
received regular visits from CIA agents
that he showed them unedited copy from
his correspondence as well as in house
never end up and cover letters that the
reporters sent back with their stories
presumably the reporters were not aware
of this when it was going on Harrison
says that his predecessor the Christian
Science Monitor did the same thing I
inherited the situation and I continued
it he told Stewart Laurie and I did it
because we were Americans and we were
helping out and don't forget this was
during the Cold War and everybody was
doing it so the CIA reviewed reporters
material but it also paid and still does
pay reporters to gather material
according to a former CIA station chief
in Europe this is typically how the
arrangement works quoting now from the
luery article usually we dealt with
stringers or people who work for smaller
newspapers the hangers-on we would keep
on the lookout for a guy and said who
said there was t I know of a really good
story and say
Rumania but my paper is too cheap to
send me there they want to meet a city
Paris and file the official communique s
so we would see an opening first we
would check with our superiors in
Washington and after we got the OK we
would get in touch with the guy and say
look if you want to go to Romania we'll
buy you the airplane ticket and pick up
the hotel bill and give you a little
cash all the station chief asked in
return was a debriefing when the newsmen
returned at an opportunity to look at
his carbons and at the answer and to
answer a few questions in Eastern Europe
Stu larae reports these reporters were
asked to make observations that would
later be helpful to agents on a
sensitive mission we asked them says one
former station chief to remember whether
their passports were picked up at the
hotels they stayed in whether the police
of a certain city followed them to
locate the restaurants where the
Intelligencia hung out two and a half
years ago
CIA director Colby admitted that there
were some three dozen reporters on his
payroll and he said he would dismiss
five of them that's what he said in that
star news story that Lawrie talked about
the five of course are the ones who
presumably work for the big general
circulation news organizations according
to stool areas of this spring the agency
admits only that it's fired for the
fifth for some reason is staying on the
payroll as for the other thirty lesser
journalists they are still collecting
fees either on a regular basis or per
assignment now just how this admission
by CIA director Colby affects the rest
of the American correspondence working
abroad we can't say but it certainly
seems that if the CIA is paying any
American reporters secretly to gather
information that can help but make it
harder for the rest of the reporters no
propaganda for years the CIA waded a
media campaign in Europe to combat
communist propaganda Arthur Cox a former
CIA operative when we talked to this
week call it fighting fire with fire and
as an illustration he referred to
Portugal today to the Portuguese press
and he said imagine a story appearing
singing the praises of a left-wing
political figure there presumably says
Cox it's a puff piece planted by the
Russians to promote one of their
favorites we answer back with a counter
story describing the same guy as a
villain and a scoundrel this kind of
competition in the newspapers requires
extensive payments to European reporters
in some cases the CIA actually created
or sustained whole news organizations as
you heard Stu Larry say in his talk the
CIA bought part ownership of an Italian
paper the daily American paying between
80 and 90 thousand dollars to keep the
paper printing stories that support the
American interests in the Mediterranean
and a few weeks ago a British magazine
timeout discovered in the PhD thesis out
of Oxford evidence that the CIA created
a British news organization called forum
world features it's a Delaware
corporation owned on the record from
1966 1973 by John Hay Whitney the former
publisher of The Herald Tribune and from
time to time supposedly this new service
published stories sympathetic to US
involvement in Vietnam mr. Whitney says
he has no comment on any CIA association
with forum world features the editors
who may not have known say the charges
are false but former CIA man that Arthur
Cox points out that some of the missin
and propaganda planted by the agencies
in the European press comes back to the
United States and misinformed us - and
he wonders whether the price we all pay
in this kind of competition is worth it
and so the problem comes up today before
the House Intelligence Committee hears
chairman Hoda spike to start things off
witness this afternoon is mr. William
called me who has been up on Capitol
Hill before
thank you for walked up quite a few
bills and down again it seems to me mr.
colbey in the last few days weeks and
maybe even hours I'm not sure of the
perils of Kobe today but it's an
interesting subject matter I would like
to State before we start not only my
appreciation for your being here but my
conception of what you have done in the
last few weeks and months there is a
great deal of commentary and comment
about whether or not the director of
Central Intelligence has been quote
forthcoming end quote and that's the
word that is used all the time as to
your relations with Capitol Hill I've
heard comments to the effect that you
have been too forthcoming with Capitol
Hill it has been my own experience and
judgment that if you are asked precisely
the right question you will give an
honest answer you do not lead us into
those areas which would help us know
what the right question was to ask you
not make it easy for us to answer the
right questions anyone who thinks that
you have been running back and forth to
Capitol Hill with briefcases bulging
with secrets which you are eager to
bestow upon us hasn't sat on my side of
the desk and in my judgment you have
done a very responsible job for your
agency at a time when your agency had
great problems and I welcome you back
here not as a friend but as a respected
adversary and I I feel that that is the
relationship which we have had I think
that you have the same concept of the
Constitution of the United States which
is shared by most of the members of this
committee and I just personally want to
say that glad that you're here and glad
that you will sort of see the agency
through these next few weeks mr. Murphy
short in strong amen to what you just
said I've ripped to over the
commentaries I found mr. Kobe as you
have indicated doing nothing other than
his job as he sees it as an American and
I think that he's a man of integrity we
have a responsibility in this government
co-equal with the executive branch and
seeing that the rights of Americans
aren't violated and I just like to add
that I think mr. Kobe is a fine and
decent man and I think the president do
well to consider his previous actions it
is my understanding mr. Colby that you
have an opening statement to give us
this afternoon on our basic subject
matter which comes under your heading of
personnel
and my heading or our heading of risks
and what we are interested in looking at
is where the CIA has people stashed away
throughout the United States of America
and overseas and I realize that some of
this will have to be done in executive
session but I would like to stay in open
session as long as we can please proceed
mr. chairman thank you and thank you for
the remarks mr. chairman on CIA
personnel when they go overseas
obviously must go under some other title
this is in some cases a title of another
agency of the government in some cases
is a some other title outside of the
government for reasons of continuity CIA
personnel is and sometimes have to
retain that identification while they
serve at or within the United States
this is this is a headquarters tour and
they are not using that cover for
another reason during that period but
merely to provide some continuity there
are certain activities that we have done
within the United States that do need
some other identification than CIA I
think I've explained on previous
occasions the need for for covering a
security investigation so that it does
not highlight the fact that that the
person being investigated will shortly
become a member of the CIA because we do
not want that reputation to be around
but I think you have asked to to in
particular areas be covered miss
chairman one subject of details to other
government agency as distinct from the
use of other covers other agencies cover
and secondly the relationship with the
field of journalism generally in our
operations with respect to the last part
of that the journalists areum's chairman
I obviously cannot go into detail as to
the identification Zoar the people
involved but I think I can sketch a few
points there within which we can go into
full detail in the executive session in
the first place as people equally
interested in Foreign Affairs CIA people
and journalists frequently run into each
other and exchange ideas
this had occurs both abroad in our
stations abroad and in in the United
States in the past year for example CIA
has has received in our building for
discussions of foreign events still not
about a hundred journalists or a
detailed discussion and analysis of some
foreign situation in that time we have
answered something like twelve or
thirteen hundred telephone inquiries
from journalists about some development
abroad some foreign development on which
the journalist is seeking the advice
that and the judgments of our analysts
about that situation I think this is a
both perfectly proper mr. chairman and I
think it is more than perfectly proper I
think is part of the effort we in CIA
are making to ensure that our product is
useful not only to the elements of the
executive branch who need it directly
but also to the Congress where we do
make much of our information available
to the congressional committees and we
do this on both a regular and periodic
basis and we do it in response to
specific requests for testimony on the
situation in some foreign situation
likewise I think it important that our
public benefits from to the extent
feasible within the limits of the of the
requirement to keep the sensitive
sources secret and for that reason we do
respond to these journalistic inquiries
about some situation abroad the numbers
I gave you are those in which we
discussed the substance I'm not
including the number of journalists that
have been curious about the state of the
of the intelligence community
these days or CIA or any of those things
that's a totally separate category and
it's a larger larger total number I
might add but beyond that mr. chairman
we have over the years used at a an
operational relationship with a certain
number of journalists overseas we have
worked with these people to again to
help us on our foreign intelligence
responsibilities in some cases they can
provide us information that we ask them
about in some cases they can make
contacts with people that it is
difficult for an official of an embassy
or an American mission abroad to be in
touch with and for this reason we have
on occasion used people who have
connections with journalism for this dis
purpose under our own restraints we have
been very careful about this and in
recent years we have even further
strengthened our restrictions on this
matter we have taken particular caution
to ensure that our operations are
focused abroad and are not deal focused
and at the United States in the sense of
collecting information about the United
States or on the other hand influencing
the opinion of the American people about
things that from from a CIA point of
view we have dropped contacts and
relationships with journalists and
others in the past couple of years where
we felt that there was some belief that
that relationship could be construed as
an effort to influence a major
circulation American Journal for example
or that a particular project would be
aimed at affecting US public opinion
through media operations in order to
carry out this policy we have a careful
regulatory control procedure in our
Operations Directorate and our current
regulations require the approval of a
senior level of the agency when any with
any with respect to any
action with American journalist or media
personality and as a further matter of
policy
even with those journalists that we do
deal with and it is a very small number
which I would certainly give you in the
executive session this Chairman we do
not attempt to influence what they put
in their US journals what they do with
respect to their own journal is their
business
and we do not we do not tell them what
stories to write or what subjects to
cover we do not at this time
employ any staff members of regular US
general circulation journals you may
recall there was some publicity a couple
of years ago at which I undertook the
commitment to terminate any such
relationships and over these past two
years we have terminated those
relationships we have certain other
contacts with people with considerably
less connection with with American
journals or considerably less of a of a
standing as a general circulation
Journal and those we have continued
because we believe that their material
does not affect American public opinion
in any substantial basis or that their
material is viewed as something coming
from the outside and something that the
journal has a full choice over whether
it wishes to keep it or not
turning to the other subject mr.
chairman that the subject of detail
leaves in common with the other agencies
of the government CIA as a program which
permits the detail of our employees to
other agencies the detail of agency
personnel is approved when the
assignment is determined to be
beneficial to the career development of
an individual or where it can make a
contribution to a foreign intelligence
related activity employees and unfits
details normally continue to receive
their age
the entitlements during such a detail in
a sense I was one of those at one time
is chairman when I left the agency on
leave without pay and served in the
Agency for International Development and
the Department of State when I was in
Vietnam and and later returned to the to
the agency I was not undercover at that
time I was a detailed reimbursement to
CIA for such detail depends upon the
individual circumstances of each detail
if the employee performs agency related
duties or is a participant in a joint
operation of a National Intelligence
program or as assigned as part of a
career development plan then we will be
great we will reimburse the agency that
he works for for his services if on the
other hand if he moves totally to
another agency and works for it on its
functions for a period where he is
essentially doing their work and they
will not be reimbursed during that
period they will the receiving agency
will pay for his full entitlements I
might add here that no such details are
effected without a full coordination
with the appropriate age officials in
the agency to which the individual is
assigned or detailed so that there is no
penetration of the detail without the
knowledge of its senior management as of
the 21st of October of this year there
were 104 employees of CIA on detail two
other components of the United States
government these we were reimbursed for
27 and we were not reimbursed for 77 now
there are also times mr. chairman when
CIA has a need for a skill from the of
an individual who comes from another
government agency CIA particularly in
its earlier days was heavily staffed by
military personnel who were detailed and
a number of the senior officers in the
armed
today spent a tour of a two or three
years in CIA at some point in the early
50s also there may be of activities of
common concern to the CIA and to another
government agency on a matter of common
concern to the intelligence community
if these situations exist we make
arrangements for a reimbursable or non
reimbursable depending on the
circumstances detail from the other
agency to CIA as of the 21st of October
of this year we had 179 details in from
such other agencies of the government of
which we were reimbursed for 80 the
others of course were non reimbursed in
the total of 99 I think that gives the
overall picture of these two subjects
mr. chairman I'd be delighted to answer
the questions and to the degree of which
I can well I don't know how far we're
going to be able to go in a open session
but we're going to try huming Otis pike
when did you last house and I'll go
withdrawal that do you now have people
who are being paid by the CIA on any
thing which you referred to as a major
circulation American Journal we have no
staff members of any such Alesana
the question the question was do you
have any people being paid by the CIA
who are contributing to anything which
you called quote a major circulation
American Journal yes mr. chairman we do
we have some who are in the category of
freelancer or stringer or something of
that nature abroad individuals who are
not consider
the part of the staff of that room I'm
not going to ask you the names or the
numbers I am going to ask you this
however do you have any people who are
on the staffs of major circulation
American journals without who are
contributing to major circulation
American journals who you are paying
without the knowledge of the management
of the major circulation American
journalist yes we do
strangers who are submitting occasional
pieces or frequent pieces to various
journal says that we have not told the
management about them but they are
considered as non staff members of that
journal they're independent contractors
do you have any people at the present
time who are paid full-time by the CIA
who also write for major circulation
American journals we do have abroad some
of our employees who are paid for their
services by CIA who also submit pieces
occasionally as it's a very small number
but we do have people who submit theses
to other to American journals do you
have any people paid by the CIA who are
working for television networks this I
think gets into the kind of getting into
the details mr. chairman that I'd like
to get into an executive session I I
think if we begin to break the question
down into the component parts we begin
to focus things a bit well when you
refer
two major circulation American journals
are you referring to both written media
and visual media yes I do I'm sorry I
should have made that clear all right
do you have any people being paid by the
CIA who are contributing to the national
news services and by that I'm referring
to a the-- and UPI well again I think
we're getting into the kind of detail
mr. chairman that I prefer to handle an
executive session mr. McClory
Thank You mr. chairman first of all I
want to ultimately Clarie a Republican
from Illinois a showing the House
Intelligence hearing at school
Washington the line that I am and the
news reports that you are willing to
remain on for a while as a director of
Central Intelligence in head of the CIA
and I want to on a state stayed very
forthrightly that I think the
cooperation that you provided the
information you provided through your
testimony and through the cooperation
you provided through your agency has
been invaluable insofar as the work of
this committee is concerned and I
commend you for it and I want to
personally express my appreciation to
you for the very professional very high
level and a very cooperative way in
which you have behaved as a as a public
official and one who is responding to
extensive inquiry by the Select
Committee of the Congress or with
respect to the subject of detailees I
my hand in a document which I understand
has been Declassified in which you may
have before you end up do permit I would
like to ask you questions about it it
relates to political aspects of an
individual who was assigned to the
National Security Council staff and if
it I would like to confirm first of all
that that has been Declassified yes Mr
curry the person's name is Chester
Cooper was Chester Cooper in 1964 while
serving in the system deputy director
for intelligence for policy support in
the Central Intelligence Agency assigned
to the White House as a detailee he was
a CIA employee who was assigned to the
White House to the National Security
Council staff I believe he worked at the
White House with mr. Majority Bundy on
national security matters and during
that time he also participated in
drafting campaign speeches on
international issues which were
delivered by President Johnson and by
other senior officials as a member of
the NSC staff he primarily worked on
intelligence matters related to the
Vietnam and Chinese affairs which was
his specialty at the time during that
period he he did assist in the drafting
of certain speeches by the President and
he also participated in the preparation
of a fact book which were on national
security and other matters which was
used by the Democratic National
Committee that is indicated by this
report mr. McClory and I don't contest
it does the report also indicate that
mr. Cooper was the individual who in
1964 and I think this was ascertained as
late as 1973 that he was the individual
who was getting advanced copies of
candidates senator Goldwater
speeches and delivering them to the two
I guess Democratic personnel President
Johnson before senator Goldwater was
delivering the speeches I believe there
was an arrangement at that time mr.
McCrory by which somebody picked up the
copies of mr. Goldwater speeches which
had been made available in advanced
distribution for the press and brought
them to him they picked him up at the at
the Republican headquarters now at this
time and the director of the Central
Intelligence was mr. McComb yes who's
Tracy Barnes mr. Tracy Barnes was the
chief of the domestic operations
division which was the division which
was responsible for certain of our
foreign intelligence activities here in
the united stand this memorandum
indicates that he's the one that
arranged this this activity up who does
it worse Tracy Barnes now and mr. Barnes
unfortunately died several years ago now
how do you regard this the kind of
activity on the part of a detailer mr.
Colby I think mr. McQuarry this was on
the edge somewhere of what he should
have been doing and what he shouldn't
have working in the National Security
Council staff I'm sure he was providing
his experience and his assistance to the
to the National Security Council and to
the president in that position well even
though we regard the President of the
United States whoever he happened to be
is the one who is in charge of the
National Security Council into the
intelligence community it would not be
appropriate would it be in your opinions
for a CIA employee to be getting
advanced copies of speeches by a and
opposing candidates and delivering them
president I think that was improper mr.
McClory no question I draw the
distinction between that aspect of this
report and the aspect of his working as
part of the of the National Security
Council staff on these matters these the
matters that he was an expert on were
was such a prominent part of the whole
activity of the White House at that time
there was probably very difficult for
him to distinguish between what was
proper support to the president and what
was political understands this one
further for the CIA you wouldn't
countenance this kind of activity I said
you would not countenance picking up
speeches and giving them to to speeches
by another candidate and giving them to
the to the White House no I wasn't
playing mr. Dallas thank you very much
mr. chairman
there was a Democrat from California
questioning we included several years
several full-time employees of major
domestic media instruments were also
full-time employees of central
intelligence agency I think I can answer
that better mr. Dillon's in executive
session I think that I would rather
answer it in the executive session of
fun night
well I have a series of additional
questions that we follow on to that in
executive session I have here our mr.
Colby you have further response to that
you know I have two books here one is
the dentox key papers and the other is
the flute class by fragrance what part
of the CIA play in writing publishing
and or distributing either one or both
of these books I would like to discuss
that an executive session if I may mr.
Delmas I don't know mr. chairman whether
it's appropriate to ask a question of
rough weather what is your explanation
of white black and gray media operations
would that also be more appropriate and
executive session or can you talk about
it generally an open session I can
describe that this was a a set of
definitions that was worked out within
the government about 15 years ago more
or less white propaganda would be
propaganda which is clearly attributed
to the to its originator something like
Voice of America something of that
nature the gray propaganda is material
which is not attributed to the
originator and which there is some other
attribution of the of the hards original
origin of the material black propaganda
is material which is a derivative to the
target itself in other words say a
document which is pretends to be we have
we have had a number of those kinds of
documents which we looked into by a
house committee some years ago
distributed in Africa alleging to be
American Foreign Service telegrams and
messages put out to with communist
support we are we know that
time the document was a falsely
attributed to the United States that was
designed to show the United States and
some bad lighted or other that would be
an item of black propaganda Thank You
Heba CIE ever planted or leaked stories
to foreign press sources and if the
answer to that question is yes where any
of the stories false or in any way
misleading as a part of our our covert
propaganda responsibilities mr. Collins
we have provided a certain amount of
information all over the world implant
in the foreign press as the CIA ever
ever financed published or controlled at
least in part newspapers new services
journals or periodicals and formations
and if so what was the general purpose
again as a part of our responsibilities
for covert political and propaganda
action abroad the answer in a very broad
sense is yes and I would like to go into
detail in the executive session
thank you have the CIA ever asked us
journalists to write a particular story
or express CIA selected information when
respective foreign journalists and for
foreign publication the answer is yes
u.s. journalist the with respect to
American journals the the newsmen that
we were discussing earlier we make a
particular point of not instructing them
as to what they should write in the
American media that they write for have
the CIA ever asked the media network or
journal to ever kill a story I spent a
great deal of my time than earlier this
year trying to get that done mr. Dellums
I think that that
No there have been other times there
have been times I have appealed to do
the responsibility of the journalists in
America not to run a story the gentleman
yield basis of my event any times in the
last two weeks
no something cystic like I've asked this
question several times I'm not sure if
we've gotten a clear clear answer but
can you explain the nature of the
relationship between the CIA and Craig
republishes I would rather go into that
in detail in an executive session mr.
Dolan has the CIA ever covertly assisted
the publication distribution or writing
of any article book or media
presentation in the United States Army
of mr. earlier comments that I think I
really have to explain that in executive
session I revert to my point that any
activity we do in this field is aimed
abroad but I must explain the details of
that in an executive session gentleman
has expired mr. Murphy Morgan Murphy a
immigrant from Illinois CIA officers are
assigned to the BND and its successor
the DEA yes there were certain at
various times mr. Murphy and how about
the dia dia he is the same answer to the
Treasury Department yes
are these CIA detailees ever asked to
report back to the CIA as to what was
happening at the organization in which
they were detail while certain of the
CIA officers detail to those
organizations are deep
as on officers in which case their
function is to make sure that there's a
full exchange of information between the
two agencies on that job certain of them
however are it's time to work in that
area for a time and they are given over
to the full command authority of the
organization to which they're sent
were there any CIA detail edom possibly
we can only go into this in executive
session detailed to cabinet officers in
any administration yes certain occasions
on a permanent basis a secretarial level
or administrative assistant level I can
think of one secretariat it was detailed
to the White House at one point and an
individual later became a cabinet
officer and asked to that she assists
him in his new job he do he knew at all
times when she was of course in her
background
were there any of the members of
cabinets that had CIA detailing that
were unaware of their status as a CIA
agent or former employee of the CIA well
as performer I cannot say when they
leave CIA and take another job somewhere
else the CIA does not follow them not
work or make any arrangement as for
current employees
I mean CIA detailee to us to another
agency is revealed through the
management of that agency now I think we
established the fact that there were
some detail Dean's of the CIA detailed
to the White House's are correct there
are yes and would they be reporting back
on a regular basis to the CIA as to any
and all activities within their purview
in the White House no they I have
instructed have instructed at least two
or three of them that I know of that
they are not to report to me what they
learn in that job except that it's an
extent that the that their employers
their current employers want them to do
so some of them as I say our liaison
officers and for that reason they are
passing on decisions and asking on
questions that that they want to have
studying from an intelligence point of
view our any of your CIA people use as
interpreters and high-level discussions
between foreign heads of governments in
our in our government my absolute
general Walters has a reputation as one
of the foremost interpreters in the
world and he has served I think almost
every president in that position he is a
military officer he was an attache
before an over a number of years but
since he has become the deputy director
of intelligence he has on occasion
served as interpreter could we an
executive session
find out - well our cinema sector
especially Thank You mr. Traynor keen
Catrin and Heather came to Louisiana
questioningly including all in the 1964
activity that mr. McClory referred to to
honest and this has just come to my
attention so I'm not very familiar with
the material that's been presented to us
but do I understand that the woman who
picked up the copies of senator
goldwater speeches in the summer of 1964
was an employee of the CIA herself
I believe yes employed by the domestic
operations division yes who is this
woman I don't know the name right now
mr. green I'm sure I could find it out
do we know if she's still employed by
the CIA she's currently retired
she's retired CIA employed but she can
be identified but we simply don't have
our name at this time and
is that correct she was interviewed in
the course of the Watergate hearings in
which I think some of this came up at
one point for some reason can anyone for
witness table to tell us who this woman
was
I would I would like to supply the name
I don't know the name of fans who will
buy the name I will supply the name for
the question systems I've missed yes
Bobby please you can mercy you detail
any CIA employees of which committee or
the church permission no mr. Murphy
although I'm not sure whether this
committee but I know that church
committee has some former employees on
it but I have no connection with them
what the gentleman yield
I yield to mr. just ask me observe when
you detail people to the White House as
this person Cooper was detailed to the
White House the president or or the
people at the White House are they
advised that's the CIA is putting
somebody in the windows but the
arrangements are made with the
administrative elements they're tubes
that they send an officer neither credly
the way there's not irritate overtly
it's very clearly a CIA identification
and we frequently are asked to send
somebody and mr. Cooper was a good
example mr. Cooper was very well
informed on Vietnamese Affairs and he
went over to help the National Security
Council staff on that on Vietnamese
affairs especially and then team reports
does he report back to the CIA and
preliminary report reported at that time
to the National Security Council staff I
won't say never had lunch with an old
friend but he certainly is
his lines of reporting and his lines of
authority were clear while he worked
over there he worked for the National
Security Council full of this operation
mr. Colby for this employee of the
domestic operations division this woman
who approved her activities and going
and getting copies of speeches as an
employee and delivering them to mr.
Cooper r2 or through some other channel
which ultimately reached Cooper I
believe the record indicates that this
was initiated by mr. Barnes who is
deceased that clue is to say he had to
have approval from a higher-up I I don't
believe there's any indication that he
ever asked for it or or needed it would
you examine the records to see if you
can find if mr. Barnes left any evidence
of where he got his authority to do this
I will be pleased to yield of Chairman I
am a Larson better questions when asked
mr. Ashman chairman just to try I don't
know how many questions I can act in
open session mr. Comey but just a couple
of things about the stringers that have
that are working or they are paid by the
CIA are those when you recruit people
like that is that it their suggestion or
your suggestion do you approach somebody
that you think would be useful or do
they somehow come to you well both mr.
aspen but any such operation is reviewed
very very carefully by the Nelson
as my deputy for operations this is not
done on the say-so of a subordinate
officer somewhere and a full
consideration is is taken of whether the
man clearly is not a staff member of a
general circulation Journal or media and
secondly that there be no influence on
the American opinion and press as a
result so nothing that you write you
don't try to influence his opinion of
the answer here how about a foreign
publication that might appear in the
United States published abroad but but
is distributed in the United States this
is les aspin of Wisconsin you could
probably say and and of course if a
story appears in a foreign publication
it might be picked up by a wire service
in their career so there's UNAMID story
yeah I could be at the far end but
that's that's not I think that's a
purely incidental effect of the of the
activity which is conducted abroad with
its objective abroad and with its impact
abroad but it is possible even these two
kinds of instances is something which
has an impact of broader its intentions
impact abroad could in effect become
part of the United States is knowledge
about the subject or yes but on the
basis of a number of years experience of
seeing this I can think of the very very
few occasions on which any reference was
made to any such event
initiated by us abroad for a foreign
target there were very few that one or
two that I can recall there was some
reference to the fact that some event
was alleged to have taken place abroad
but nothing of any prominence nothing
that really substantially mislead the
American people or anything of that
nature in that these people are
primarily then for planning a story
abroad
or are they also for giving us
information - they're primarily for
intelligence primarily first and maybe
incidentally for planning a story and
incidentally sometimes yes now when you
you deal with these people do they get
briefings from from the CIA and would
they for example get classified
briefings well we would certainly brief
them on behavior so that they could
conduct their clandestine work safely
then so that we would have our
relationship and not be revealed in that
relationship at the same time if they
are covering some particular foreign
situation we have one of our officers is
obviously going to sit down and debrief
the man in the course of a debrief they
discuss what some target situation is
doing and the the there is an exchange
of views of what that means what the
significance what events are apt to take
place and in the course of that I'm sure
some information does go back and forth
in the question is the person who is
writing a story does he and
knowledgeable about what he is doing his
role in this thing or does he think he's
in fact putting out straight information
oh well I think we've got two things
confused now and this is a very
complicated area but in the dealing with
an intelligence collection agent abroad
who happens to be have some connection
with journals then we will talk with
them discuss within the appreciation of
what's going on in that area if we on
the other hand come to the idea that we
want to have a certain event look as
though it's taking place abroad then we
might discuss with them just exactly how
that thing should be presented so that
it will have its best effect in that
forum situation does it possible I mean
it happened that the you have on the
payroll in some way a person
writes regularly for a foreign
publication a columnist or something
like that for an public oral argument
and would it be part of the normal
routine to perhaps
slip him information and expect that he
would therefore write a column from that
that information on occasion that is
possible and is at the times when the
information that you give him is totally
fabricated documents made up to look
like they were authentic when in fact
they were totally fabricated well in
fact this that I wouldn't say it never
happened but it's a very rare event
because if he is going to be successful
in that in that activity he's got to
develop the reputation for reliability
that can only come from him having a
good solid base of information mr.
Milton this Kevin I'd ask you in a sense
reserve my time without objection Jem's
time is reserved for the SEC chairman I
would like to correct one thing I think
I may have misstated in the answer to
mr. train certain the question of
whether mr. Cooper reported to us
apparently the record is that there were
reports filed by him as to his
activities there in the white house
while he was working which were filed
with our directors deputy director for
intelligence mr. captain
Thank You mr. chairman mr. talkie Robert
Caston a Republican from Wisconsin CIA
employee is detailed to the National
Security Council well one one thing for
instance we detail people to help run
the Situation Room which handles the
incoming intelligence we detailed
individuals to help on the consideration
of some of the intelligence or or covert
action problems that take place in some
occasions we detail individuals because
they are very competent in their field
and are chosen so particularly because
of their competence that the National
Security Council wants to borrow them
and use them because of that skill why
our intelligence officers from the
Directorate of operations the covert
part of the CIA
always detailed to the 40 committee well
because in arms here the covert
operations section the normally they
they work has been is one of maintaining
contact a liaison with respect to those
covert operations and an officer deals
in that subject and maintains the way on
about those but isn't the 40 committee
supposed to be advising or at least
passing judgment on recommendations for
covert operations which would be coming
from the CIA in fact it would be coming
from the CIA Directorate of operations
section the section that they had just
left
now that the 40 committee is are the
principles of the other committee the
the officer that that acts as the
executive secretary of it merely
processes the material makes sure that
the right information is at the right
time and things of that nature
or whether the officer making a judgment
about the things that's made by the
members of the committee the operator I
am one the officer who serves as the
executive secretary of the 40 committee
I understand these are undercover people
right now and that we shouldn't use
their names but generally speaking they
lead
if the DDO go to work with the 40
committed NSC then they come back and
they go they stay working in covert
action now it seems that there's a
conflict when you're sending a person
from the CIA Anki officer in the CIA
he's undercover he then goes to work
advising on covert operations isn't
there a candy influence decisions well
it's not independent judgment in any way
he would have a special interest in in
one case if the timing was right he
could have developed the plans for a
covert operation and then next month he
becomes the individual advising the 40
committee he's over in the White House
with his other hat isn't this a conflict
no I don't think so mr. chasm the thing
is that you take a man who knows
something about the subject matter about
which he's going to be working in other
words covert actions he understands that
he understands how it works how how they
machinery works the operations take
place abroad he is detailed over there
to do the Secretary's job the executive
Secretary's job for the committee he
takes a tour there he doesn't cut his
ties with his career just by going over
there for a time he comes back and gets
reassigned to some other job other than
that during the time he there though it
is clear that he works for the affording
committee there's no doubt as to always
working for are the members of the 40
committee and other 40 committee staff
people aware that their executive
secretary is a CIA covert action suit
clearly certainly no question about that
they know exactly who he is and that he
comes from CIA that he comes from the I
guess if they're curious that he comes
from the Directorate of operations I
don't think there's any doubt about that
Thank You mr. chairman I'd be happy to
yield to mr. McClory I know that there's
a roll call vote and I know that we were
about to go into executive session I
would like to move at this time there's
no objection that
most of the committee into an executive
session I've heard will call the roll
and they voted to go into executive
session to hear more of the story from
William Colby we will of course keep
following the intelligence hearings on
open journal and in special broadcasts
when appropriate you've been listening
to open journal we're here Monday
through Friday at 7:00 I'm Jim Burrell
and have a good night